Release notes 26.7.0 (#893)
stackabletech/documentation: modules/ROOT/partials/release-notes/release-26.7.adoc

// * Trino gains a first-class PostgreSQL connector.
// * Custom OIDC clientAuthenticationMethod (fixes the 26.3 Druid OIDC issue).
// [TIP,caption=Release highlights]
// ====
// ====

[WARNING,caption=Overview of breaking changes]
====
The following components of the SDP contain breaking changes for this release:

* link:#generic-db-26_7_0[Generic database connection] (Apache Airflow, Apache Druid, Apache Hive, Apache Superset)
* link:#airflow-improvements-26_7_0[Apache Airflow] (renamed `EXPERIMENTAL_FILE_*` settings)
* link:#nifi-removals-26_7_0[Apache NiFi] (removed NiFi 1.x CRD fields)
* link:#spark-fixes-26_7_0[Apache Spark] (application templates are now namespaced)
* link:#superset-improvements-26_7_0[Apache Superset] (renamed `EXPERIMENTAL_FILE_*` settings)
// TODO(verify): confirm the image-registry change (issues#716) shipped in 26.7.0 and is breaking for non-Helm installs; if so keep the line below, otherwise remove it.
// * link:#registry-26_7_0[Image registry / repository resolution]
====

==== New platform features

===== General

====== Artifacts on quay.io

SDP artifacts are now published to quay.io directly from our CI pipelines.

> Previously, only the operator and product container images were available on quay.io, manually mirrored from oci.stackable.tech, and operators defaulted to pulling product container images from oci.stackable.tech.
> Additionally, operator Helm Charts are now published to quay.io as well.
> When installing these Helm Charts, the operators are automatically instructed to use product container images from quay.io.
> 
> [CAUTION]
> ====
> To publish operator Helm Charts to quay.io, the repository layout was adjusted to accommodate the new artifacts.
> It closely mirrors the layout of oci.stackable.tech.
> See xref:concepts:artifact-registries/index.adoc[the artifact registries page] for a detailed explanation of the new layout.
> ====
> 
> Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/716[issues#716].
> 
> ====== Miscellaneous

Reviewer: ```suggestion

====== Stackable Hub

Stackable Hub is now available at https://hub.stackable.tech[hub.stackable.tech,window=_blank].
It is a public, read-only portal for published SDP releases (and upcoming ones), bundled component version timelines, and operator CRDs including their schemas, API versions and roles per release.
A CORS-enabled, unauthenticated JSON API is available under `/api/v1/` for use in CI jobs, scripts and MCP servers.
LLMs can make use of the new llms.txt[https://hub.stackable.tech/llms.txt] file which now https://docs.stackable.tech/llms.txt[also exists] for the documentation.
We plan on migrating the current https://crds.stackable.tech[CRD browser] to the Hub in the near future.
We also plan on migrating the current https://sboms.stackable.tech[SBOM browser] to the Hub in the near future.

This is an early version of the Hub and we're happy to receive feedback.

====== Miscellaneous
```

  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/opensearch-operator/pull/130[opensearch-operator#130].
* The OpenSearch operator now supports JSON Merge Patches, JSON Patches and user-provided JSON files in `configOverrides`, making it easier to define nested types and non-string values.
  Consult the xref:opensearch:usage-guide/configuration-environment-overrides.adoc#_configuration_properties[configuration & environment overrides] documentation page for more details.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/opensearch-operator/pull/137[opensearch-operator#137].

===== Trino

* Trino now has first-class support for the https://trino.io/docs/current/connector/postgresql.html[PostgreSQL connector {external-link-icon}^], built on the new generic database connection mechanism.
  Previously, users had to fall back to the `generic` connector.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/883[trino-operator#883].
* A new `.spec.name.inferred.replaceHyphensWithUnderscores` field on `TrinoCatalog` allows tweaking the catalog name in Trino by replacing `-` with `_`.

>   This lets you use valid Kubernetes resource names while keeping the convenience of `_` in catalog names.

Reviewer: This is rendered italic - I guess due to the "_" before and after.

Reviewer 2: Man, Antora please. I will see if I can somehow fix this.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in c723a178.

[source,plain]
----
CN=generated certificate for pod, DC=my-pod-0, DC=my-statefulset-service, DC=my-namespace, DC=svc, DC=cluster, DC=local
----

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/secret-operator/pull/708[secret-operator#708].
--
* The name of the key in the ConfigMap/Secret that holds the PEM-encoded CA certificate of a `TrustStore` is now configurable, via xref:secret-operator:truststore.adoc[`.spec.tlsPemCaName`].
  This is needed, for example, to use the generated Secret within an OpenShift Ingress.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/secret-operator/pull/679[secret-operator#679].

==== Platform improvements

===== General

====== Vulnerabilities

// TODO(verify): CVE counts. e.g. "NNN CVEs were fixed in the Stackable product images. This includes N critical and NN high-severity CVEs."

====== Miscellaneous

* *Breaking:* All operators now support dynamic image repositories during product image selection instead of hard-coding `oci.stackable.tech`.
  This enables us to automatically pick the correct registry when operators are installed via the Helm Chart or the OLM manifest.

>   This is achieved by introducing the new `--image-repository` CLI argument and `IMAGE_REPOSITORY` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Breaking:* Operators now determine the registry for product images from where they were installed, instead of always defaulting to oci.stackable.tech.
  This is controlled by a new `--image-repository` CLI argument (also settable via the environment variable `IMAGE_REPOSITORY`), which lets the correct registry be selected automatically when an operator is installed via its Helm Chart or Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) manifest.
```

Reviewer 2: I would be happy with this:

```suggestion
* *Breaking:* Operators now determine the registry for product images from where they were installed, instead of hard-coding `oci.stackable.tech`.
  This is controlled by a new `--image-repository` CLI argument (and the `IMAGE_REPOSITORY` environment variable), which lets the correct registry be selected automatically when an operator is installed via its Helm Chart or Operator Lifecycle Manager (OLM) manifest.
```

Reviewer: Works for me!

+
--
[NOTE]
====

> When installing the operators via the Helm Chart from `oci.stackable.tech` or `quay.io`, the environment variable is automatically set and installation continues to work as before.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is only breaking if you deploy operators *without* our Helm Charts or OLM manifests, in which case you must now supply `--image-repository` yourself.
When installing via Helm or OLM the argument is set automatically, and installation works as before.
```

** Trino in https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/876[trino-operator#876] and
** Apache Airflow in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/770[airflow-operator#770]

+
Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/843[issues#843].

===== Apache Airflow

OPA authorization now works for Apache Airflow 3 with any user role.
Previously, OPA rulesets were only applied for users with the `Admin` role.
Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/pull/1512[docker-images#1512] and regression tested in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/800[airflow-operator#800].

===== Apache NiFi

The NiFi OPA authorizer plugin no longer exhausts native threads under load.
Previously, the plugin could create a new HTTP client for each authorization request, spawning large numbers of selector and executor threads under NiFi load and eventually exhausting native threads.
With this release, all OPA authorization requests share a single pooled HTTP client with a fixed-size daemon-thread executor.
Existing deployments need no configuration changes, as defaults are provided.

> Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-opa-plugin/issues/30[nifi-opa-plugin#30] and fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-opa-plugin/issues/30[nifi-opa-plugin#31].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-opa-plugin/issues/30[nifi-opa-plugin#30] and fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-opa-plugin/pull/31[nifi-opa-plugin#31].
```

In the last release, hot-reloading of password file Secrets did not work anymore because a change to the Secret triggered a restart of the pods.
With this release, the password file Secrets are excluded from the restart-controller and hot-reloading is supported again.
Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/868[trino-operator#868].

==== Platform removals

[#nifi-removals-26_7_0]
===== Apache NiFi

*Breaking:* Support for NiFi 1.x has been dropped, along with a few CRD fields that only applied to 1.x and had no effect on NiFi 2.x:

* `spec.clusterConfig.createReportingTaskJob` (including `enabled` and `podOverrides`) is removed.
  NiFi 2.x exposes Prometheus metrics directly at `/nifi-api/flow/metrics/prometheus`, so the reporting-task Job is obsolete.
* The deprecated `spec.clusterConfig.sensitiveProperties.algorithm` values are removed.
  Use a supported algorithm instead: `nifiArgon2AesGcm256` (default) or `nifiPbkdf2AesGcm256`.

Removed in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/pull/960[nifi-operator#960].

==== Supported versions

===== Product versions

As with previous SDP releases, many product images have been updated to newer versions.

> Refer to the xref:operators:supported_versions.adoc[supported versions] documentation for a complete overview including LTS versions or deprecations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the https://hub.stackable.tech/releases/26.7[new Stackable Hub] for a complete overview including LTS versions or deprecations.
```

== Release 26.7
:secret-volume-annotation: secret-operator:volume.adoc#_secrets_stackable_techbackend_autotls_cert_domain_components_in_subject_dn

=== 26.7.0

Released on 2026-07-21.

[TIP,caption=Release highlights]
====
* Generic database connection mechanism rolled out across operators.
* Operators automatically select product image registry based on where they were installed from.
* The User Info Fetcher (UIF) now fetches a more complete set of memberships of users from Entra.
====

[WARNING,caption=Overview of breaking changes]
====
The following components of the SDP contain breaking changes for this release:

> * link:#generic-db-26_7_0[Generic database connection]: Adjustments needed for Apache Airflow, Apache Druid, Apache Hive, Apache Superset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:#generic-db-26_7_0[Apache Airflow, Apache Druid, Apache Hive, Apache Superset]: Generic database connections adjustments needed for the mentioned operators.
```

* link:#airflow-improvements-26_7_0[Apache Airflow]: Renamed `EXPERIMENTAL_FILE_*` settings
* link:#superset-improvements-26_7_0[Apache Superset]: Renamed `EXPERIMENTAL_FILE_*` settings

> * link:#spark-fixes-26_7_0[Apache Spark] The Spark application templates are now namespaced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* link:#spark-fixes-26_7_0[Apache Spark]: The Spark application templates are now namespaced
```

Reviewer: To make it consistent

Reviewer 2: Fixed in 71fbbb28.

* link:#nifi-removals-26_7_0[Apache NiFi]: NiFi 1.x CRD fields were removed
* link:#druid-37_0_0[Apache Druid]: Druid 37.0.0 enforces TLS and requires that the S3 region is set
* link:#misc-improvements-registry-26_7_0[Product image selection]: Operators need a registry for product image selection
====

==== New platform features

===== General

====== Artifacts on quay.io

SDP artifacts are now published to quay.io directly from our CI pipelines.
Previously, only the operator and product container images were available on quay.io, manually mirrored from oci.stackable.tech, and operators defaulted to pulling product container images from oci.stackable.tech.
Additionally, operator Helm Charts are now published to quay.io as well.
When installing these Helm Charts, the operators are automatically instructed to use product container images from quay.io.

[CAUTION]
====
To publish operator Helm Charts to quay.io, the repository layout was adjusted to accommodate the new artifacts.

> It closely mirrors the layout of oci.stackable.tech.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It closely mirrors the layout of oci.stackable.tech.
This new layout applies only to releases from SDP 26.7 onwards.
Artifacts for earlier releases are unaffected and remain available at their existing locations.
```

See xref:concepts:artifact-registries/index.adoc[the artifact registries page] for a detailed explanation of the new layout.
====

Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/716[issues#716].

====== Stackable Hub

Stackable Hub is now available at https://hub.stackable.tech[hub.stackable.tech,window=_blank].
It is a public, read-only portal for published SDP releases (and upcoming ones), bundled component version timelines, and operator CRDs including their schemas, API versions and roles per release.
A CORS-enabled, unauthenticated JSON API is available under `/api/v1/` for use in CI jobs, scripts and MCP servers.

> LLMs can make use of the new https://hub.stackable.tech/llms.txt[llms.txt] file which now https://docs.stackable.tech/llms.txt[also exists] for the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Hub publishes an https://hub.stackable.tech/llms.txt[`llms.txt`] file for use with LLM tooling.
The documentation site now provides one at https://docs.stackable.tech/llms.txt[docs.stackable.tech/llms.txt] as well.
```

I know this was me but it doesn't read well.

  The same typed structure is used in every CRD, so it can be copied between stacklets.
+
--
[WARNING]
====
*Breaking:* This replaces the previous free-form connection strings with a typed struct, and requires changes to your custom resources (and, in some cases, your Secrets):

* Apache Airflow: the `.clusterConfig.credentialsSecret` field is renamed to `.clusterConfig.credentialsSecretName`, and the database connection becomes a typed struct.
  Consult the xref:airflow:usage-guide/database-connections.adoc[database connections] documentation page for more details.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/754[airflow-operator#754].
* Apache Druid: the `metadataStorageDatabase` field is renamed to `metadataDatabase` and is now a typed struct.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/druid-operator/pull/814[druid-operator#814].
* Apache Hive: the connection becomes a typed struct; because the `database` field is removed, the `username` field must be transferred to the Secret referenced in `credentialsSecretName` under the `username` key before upgrading.

>   Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/hive-operator/pull/674[hive-operator#674].

Reviewer: Flagging that these two don't link to their generic database connection documentation pages like Airflow & Superset (haven't checked if they even have any :) )

Reviewer 2: I checked, and I didn't find any pages for those two.

  Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/798[issues#798].
* ConfigMaps and Secrets can now be excluded from the restart-controller.
  Set the `restarter.stackable.tech/ignore` label on a ConfigMap or Secret, or the `restarter.stackable.tech/ignore-configmap.x` / `restarter.stackable.tech/ignore-secret.x` annotations on a StatefulSet.
  Consult the xref:commons-operator:restarter.adoc#_configmapsecret[restarter] documentation page of the Stackable commons-operator for more details.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/commons-operator/pull/410[commons-operator#410].

[#airflow-improvements-26_7_0]
===== Apache Airflow

*Breaking:* `EXPERIMENTAL_FILE_HEADER` and `EXPERIMENTAL_FILE_FOOTER` in `webserver_config.py` (for arbitrary Python code) have been renamed to `FILE_HEADER` and `FILE_FOOTER`.
Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/777[airflow-operator#777].

===== Apache Kafka

The FQDNs of the Kafka Pods are now included in the subject DNs of their TLS certificates.
OPA Rego rules can now check these FQDNs.

> Existing OPA rules may need to be adjusted.

Reviewer: I think we should mention this in the breaking overview as well and mark this as potentially breaking (we really need a better label for that but not now...)

Reviewer 2: I would be fine calling this **Potentially breaking**, but let's stick with one keyword for now.

Reviewer 2: I marked it as breaking in 8302a2d9.

  NiFi 2.x exposes Prometheus metrics directly at `/nifi-api/flow/metrics/prometheus`, so the reporting-task Job is obsolete.
* The deprecated `spec.clusterConfig.sensitiveProperties.algorithm` values are removed.
  Use a supported algorithm instead: `nifiArgon2AesGcm256` (default) or `nifiPbkdf2AesGcm256`.

Removed in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/pull/960[nifi-operator#960].

==== Supported versions

===== Product versions

As with previous SDP releases, many product images have been updated to newer versions.
Refer to the https://hub.stackable.tech/releases/26.7[new Stackable Hub] for a complete overview including LTS versions or deprecations.

====== New LTS versions

The following product versions were already available before but are now marked as the xref:compliance:policies.adoc#_product_lifecycle_policy[LTS] version:

* Apache Hive: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1495[4.2.0 (LTS)]

====== New versions

The following new product versions are now supported:

* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1489[3.2.2]

> ** Note: this Airflow version uses Python 3.14. // TODO(verify): the docker-images#1489 note about the webserver no longer serving metrics referred to 3.2.1; confirm it still applies to 3.2.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Note: this Airflow version uses Python 3.14.
```

Reviewer: I had Claude check. It says in long words: Drop this.

* Apache Druid: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1490[34.0.0]
* Apache HBase: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1491[2.6.3]
* Apache Hive: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1495[4.1.0]
* Apache NiFi: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1498[1.28.1]
* Apache Phoenix: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1491[5.2.1]
* Apache Spark: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1502[3.5.7], https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1502[4.0.1]
* Open Policy Agent: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1499[1.8.0]
* Vector: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1486[0.52.0]

===== Kubernetes versions

This release supports the following Kubernetes versions:

* `1.36`
* `1.35`
* `1.34`
* `1.33`
* `1.32`
* `1.31`

No Kubernetes versions were dropped in this release.

===== OpenShift versions

This release is available in the RedHat Certified Operator Catalog for the following OpenShift versions:

* `4.22`
* `4.21`
* `4.20`
* `4.19`
* `4.18`

No OpenShift versions were dropped in this release.

==== Upgrade from 26.3

> // TODO(verify): consult/collect product-specific upgrade notes (e.g. the generic database connection migrations for Airflow/Druid/Hive/Superset, and the Druid 37 S3 TLS/region change).

Reviewer: TODO...

Reviewer 2: TODO removed in 7e455cac and replaced with product specific upgrade guides.

== Release 26.7

> :secret-volume-annotation: secret-operator:volume.adoc##_secrets_stackable_techbackend_autotls_cert_domain_components_in_subject_dn

Reviewer: Is the double shash correct here?

Reviewer 2: Oops, no. That is misplaced. I will remove it asap.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in d245186b.

Additionally, operator Helm Charts are now published to quay.io as well.
When installing these Helm Charts, the operators are automatically instructed to use product container images from quay.io.

[CAUTION]
====
To publish operator Helm Charts to quay.io, the repository layout was adjusted to accommodate the new artifacts.
It closely mirrors the layout of oci.stackable.tech.
See xref:concepts:artifact-registries/index.adoc[the artifact registries page] for a detailed explanation of the new layout.
====

Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/716[issues#716].

====== Stackable Hub

Stackable Hub is now available at https://hub.stackable.tech[hub.stackable.tech,window=_blank].
It is a public, read-only portal for published SDP releases (and upcoming ones), bundled component version timelines, and operator CRDs including their schemas, API versions and roles per release.
A CORS-enabled, unauthenticated JSON API is available under `/api/v1/` for use in CI jobs, scripts and MCP servers.

> LLMs can make use of the new llms.txt[https://hub.stackable.tech/llms.txt] file which now https://docs.stackable.tech/llms.txt[also exists] for the documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LLMs can make use of the new https://hub.stackable.tech/llms.txt[llms.txt] file which now https://docs.stackable.tech/llms.txt[also exists] for the documentation.
```

Reviewer: Well...the one time I tried to do something manually :)

Reviewer 2: Ah that one slipped by. I corrected two other instances of this, but it seems like I missed that one :)

* Apache Airflow: the `.clusterConfig.credentialsSecret` field is renamed to `.clusterConfig.credentialsSecretName`, and the database connection becomes a typed struct.
  Consult the xref:airflow:usage-guide/database-connections.adoc[database connections] documentation page for more details.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/754[airflow-operator#754].
* Apache Druid: the `metadataStorageDatabase` field is renamed to `metadataDatabase` and is now a typed struct.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/druid-operator/pull/814[druid-operator#814].
* Apache Hive: the connection becomes a typed struct; because the `database` field is removed, the `username` field must be transferred to the Secret referenced in `credentialsSecretName` under the `username` key before upgrading.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/hive-operator/pull/674[hive-operator#674].
* Apache Superset: the connection becomes a typed struct, and the operator now uses an internal Secret for the Superset `SECRET_KEY` (created automatically if missing).

>   Consult the xref:superset:usage-guide/database-connections.adoc[database connections] documentation page for more details.

Reviewer: This is the wrong link

Reviewer 2: I don't think it is? What should this link to in your opinion?

Reviewer: Sorry... I commented on the wrong line. I'll close this and comment again.

  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/superset-operator/pull/722[superset-operator#722].
====

// TODO(verify): xref to the per-operator database-connection usage guides (docs checking).
Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/238[issues#238].
--
* Setting a custom client authentication method is now supported for Apache Airflow, Apache Superset and Apache Druid.
  Since Apache Druid 35 and 36, OIDC authentication can fail if the provider (for example Keycloak) advertises `private_key_jwt`, because Druid may attempt to use it.

>   This feature lets you override the method so that OIDC authentication works again (this was a known issue in the 26.3.0 release).

Reviewer: If this is a fix should it be in the fixed section?

Reviewer 2: I guess it is both a fix (for Druid) and a feature for Airflow and Superset. I would say leave it where it is (a feature for 2 products VS a fix for 1 product).

  Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/838[issues#838].
* All our xref:demos:index.adoc[demos] can now be installed in non-default namespaces.
  Additionally, demos and stacks can now be uninstalled.
  Please consult the xref:management:stackablectl:commands/demo.adoc[`demo`] and xref:management:stackablectl:commands/stack.adoc[`stack`] command documentation pages for details and known limits.
  Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/stackablectl/issues/187[stackablectl#187].

===== Apache Airflow

The Apache Airflow operator now allows specifying CA certificates when using git-sync.
See the documentation page on how to xref:airflow:usage-guide/mounting-dags.adoc#_via_git_sync[mount DAGs] for more details.
Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/750[airflow-operator#750].

===== Apache NiFi

The Apache NiFi operator now allows specifying CA certificates when using git-sync.

> Consult the xref:nifi:usage_guide/custom-components.adoc[custom components] documentation page for more details.

Reviewer: Just a question: This uses an underscore `usage_guide`. For others we use `usage-guide`. Is that intentional?

Reviewer 2: It is. The NiFi docs still use the "old" name. Pretty much all other operators used the kebab-case version. That's something we have to change after 26.7.0.

Reviewer 2: I noted this down in the release retro issue here: https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/848#issuecomment-5059237907.

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/pull/903[nifi-operator#903].

===== Apache Superset

Apache Superset now supports running asynchronous queries via Celery.
Two new roles, `worker` and `beat` (limited to a single replica), have been added.
Redis is supported as the broker queue and results backend.

> Consult the xref:superset:usage-guide/database-connections.adoc[database connections] documentation page for more details.

Reviewer: This link is wrong I believe?

Reviewer 2: The release note snippet of https://github.com/stackabletech/superset-operator/pull/724 links exactly to this page. I don't think there is a different, better suited page we could link to.

Reviewer: @maltesander ping

Reviewer 3: So that link is fine and referes to the "supported redis" above. But yes this is missing https://github.com/stackabletech/superset-operator/blob/main/docs/modules/superset/pages/usage-guide/celery-async-queries.adoc (i forgot to add it to some nav / index i guess?)

Reviewer 3: @Techassi 
 
* Apache Superset now supports running asynchronous queries via Celery. Two new roles, `worker` and `beat` (limited to a single replica), have been added. Consult the xref:superset:usage-guide/celery-async-queries.adoc[async queries via Celery] documentation page for more details.
* Redis is supported as the broker queue and results backend. Consult the xref:superset:usage-guide/database-connections.adoc[database connections] documentation page for more details.

Reviewer 2: Adjusted in 7d5061bf.

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/superset-operator/pull/724[superset-operator#724].

===== Open Policy Agent

> * Previously, the user-info-fetcher's outbound HTTP requests (to Microsoft Entra, Keycloak, and the XFSC AAS) had no timeout, so a slow or unresponsive backend could make a request hang indefinitely and stall user-info lookups.

Reviewer: I'd consider this a fix instead of a new feature but happy to defer to you

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I'm fine with moving this to the fixed section.

Reviewer 2: Moved in d7fc3ee0.

          annotations:
            secrets.stackable.tech/backend.autotls.cert.domain-components-in-subject-dn: "true"
            secrets.stackable.tech/class: tls
            secrets.stackable.tech/scope: node,pod
        spec:
          storageClassName: secrets.stackable.tech
          accessModes:
            - ReadWriteOnce
          resources:
            requests:
              storage: "1"
----

A pod of a StatefulSet could then serve a TLS certificate with the following subject DN:

[source,plain]
----
CN=generated certificate for pod, DC=my-pod-0, DC=my-statefulset-service, DC=my-namespace, DC=svc, DC=cluster, DC=local
----

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/secret-operator/pull/708[secret-operator#708].
--
* The name of the key in the ConfigMap/Secret that holds the PEM-encoded CA certificate of a `TrustStore` is now configurable, via xref:secret-operator:truststore.adoc[`.spec.tlsPemCaName`].
  This is needed, for example, to use the generated Secret within an OpenShift Ingress.
  Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/secret-operator/pull/679[secret-operator#679].

==== Platform improvements

===== General

====== Vulnerabilities

> 133 vulnerabilities were fixed in SDP 26.7, including 10 critical and 62 high vulnerabilities,

Reviewer: Something missing here

Reviewer 2: Ah, that command needs to be a full stop. Will fix asap.

Reviewer 2: Fixed in d245186b.

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/opensearch-operator/pull/144[opensearch-operator#144].

==== Platform fixes

===== General

* All operators now request only the parts of the secret data they actually need for operator-managed secret volumes.
  This uses the xref:secret-operator:volume.adoc#_secrets_stackable_techprovision_parts[`secrets.stackable.tech/provision-parts`] annotation introduced in SDP 26.3.0.
  This resolves the regression where SecretClasses used only to validate server certificates also required a client certificate (`tls.crt` / `tls.key`) to be provided.
  Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/issues/issues/547[issues#547].
* Internal secrets are now stored in mutable Kubernetes Secret objects.
  Previously these objects were immutable and, if deleted, were recreated with new random values; because immutable Secrets are cached, this could disrupt clusters (for example workers failing to join).
  This release migrates existing internal Secrets to mutable versions for
** Trino in https://github.com/stackabletech/trino-operator/pull/876[trino-operator#876] and

> ** Apache Airflow in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/770[airflow-operator#770]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Apache Airflow in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/770[airflow-operator#770].
```

Previously, the plugin could create a new HTTP client for each authorization request, spawning large numbers of selector and executor threads under NiFi load and eventually exhausting native threads.
With this release, all OPA authorization requests share a single pooled HTTP client with a fixed-size daemon-thread executor.
Existing deployments need no configuration changes, as defaults are provided.
Tracked in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-opa-plugin/issues/30[nifi-opa-plugin#30] and fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-opa-plugin/pull/31[nifi-opa-plugin#31].

[#spark-fixes-26_7_0]
===== Apache Spark

* *Breaking:* Spark application templates are now namespaced objects instead of cluster-wide objects.
  They were unintentionally released as cluster-wide objects in SDP 26.3.
  You must recreate any templates in the namespaces where the applications run.
  Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/spark-k8s-operator/pull/694[spark-k8s-operator#694] (reapplied in https://github.com/stackabletech/spark-k8s-operator/pull/720[spark-k8s-operator#720]).
* User arguments are now correctly propagated to the Spark Connect server.

>   Previously, the newline concatenation in the Spark Connect server entrypoint was faulty which resulted in user arguments to be dropped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Previously, the newline concatenation in the Spark Connect server entrypoint was faulty which resulted in user arguments being dropped.
```

  Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/spark-k8s-operator/pull/696[spark-k8s-operator#696].
* Spark executors now shut down gracefully on `SIGTERM`.
  Previously the executor did not receive `SIGTERM` when the driver did, so it was `SIGKILL`ed after the grace period.
  Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/pull/1564[docker-images#1564].

===== Open Policy Agent

The Microsoft Entra backend of the OPA user-info-fetcher now retrieves complete group memberships for policy checks.
Previously, it read only the first page of a user's group memberships, so users belonging to many groups received an incomplete group list.
With this release, the Entra backend follows the result pages until every page has been retrieved (bounded to 100 pages as a safeguard).
Fixed in https://github.com/stackabletech/opa-operator/issues/858[opa-operator#858].

===== Trino

> In the last release, hot-reloading of password file Secrets did not work anymore because a change to the Secret triggered a restart of the pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of SDP 26.3, hot-reloading of password file Secrets did not work anymore because a change to the Secret triggered a restart of the pods.
```

  Use a supported algorithm instead: `nifiArgon2AesGcm256` (default) or `nifiPbkdf2AesGcm256`.

Removed in https://github.com/stackabletech/nifi-operator/pull/960[nifi-operator#960].

==== Supported versions

===== Product versions

As with previous SDP releases, many product images have been updated to newer versions.
Refer to the https://hub.stackable.tech/releases/26.7[new Stackable Hub] for a complete overview including LTS versions or deprecations.

====== New LTS versions

The following product versions were already available before but are now marked as the xref:compliance:policies.adoc#_product_lifecycle_policy[LTS] version:

* Apache Hive: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1495[4.2.0 (LTS)]

====== New versions

The following new product versions are now supported:

* Apache Airflow: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1489[3.2.2]
** Note: this Airflow version uses Python 3.14. // TODO(verify): the docker-images#1489 note about the webserver no longer serving metrics referred to 3.2.1; confirm it still applies to 3.2.2.
* [[druid-37_0_0]]Apache Druid: https://github.com/stackabletech/docker-images/issues/1490[37.0.0 (LTS)]

> ** Note: Druid 37.0.0 switched to AWS SDK v2. TLS is now enforced for S3 connections, and the S3 `region` is now required (the operator passes `aws.region` from `S3Connection.region`).

Reviewer: Should this be in the breaking section?

Reviewer 2: There is no dedicated breaking section, but I'm happy to mark it as breaking and link it to the overview of breaking changes at the top of the release notes.

Reviewer 2: Marked as breaking in b06a7b29.

Reviewer: Thanks, yeah, that's what I meant.

----

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/airflow-operator/pull/754[airflow-operator#754].
--
** *Apache Druid:* The `metadataStorageDatabase` field is renamed to `metadataDatabase` and is now a typed struct.
+
--
[source,yaml]
----
# PostgreSQL or MySQL
kind: DruidCluster
spec:
  clusterConfig:
    metadataDatabase:
      postgresql: # or mysql
        host: postgresql-druid
        database: druid
        credentialsSecretName: druid-db-credentials

# Derby
kind: DruidCluster
spec:
  clusterConfig:
    metadataDatabase:
      derby: {}
----

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/druid-operator/pull/814[druid-operator#814].
--
** *Apache Hive:* the connection becomes a typed struct; because the `database` field is removed, the `username` field must be transferred to the Secret referenced in `credentialsSecretName` under the `username` key before upgrading.
+
--
[source,yaml]
----
kind: HiveCluster
spec:
  clusterConfig:
    metadataDatabase:
      postgresql:
        host: postgresql
        database: hive
        credentialsSecretName: hive-credentials
----

Implemented in https://github.com/stackabletech/hive-operator/pull/674[hive-operator#674].
--

> ** Apache Superset: the connection becomes a typed struct, and the operator now uses an internal Secret for the Superset `SECRET_KEY` (created automatically if missing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** *Apache Superset:* the connection becomes a typed struct, and the operator now uses an internal Secret for the Superset `SECRET_KEY` (created automatically if missing).
```

Reviewer: So it's consistent with the previous ones
